---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


#BIOGRAPHIES#

**Bruce Baer Arnold** is an Assistant Professor at Canberra Law School
(University of Canberra). Dr Arnold's doctoral dissertation explored the
nature of legal identity, including the information state, autonomy and
population-scale data-mining. He has served on OECD health informatics
and data protection working parties, alongside Vice-Chairmanship of the
Australian Privacy Foundation, the Australia's preeminent civil society
body concerned with data protection. His work on new technology law and
privacy has appeared in leading journals and collections. He is a
contributor to Australia's authoritative privacy/confidentiality
practitioner resource. Dr Arnold's current research focus is on
regulatory incapacity regarding medical products and data.

**Wendy Elizabeth Bonython** is an Adjunct Associate Professor at
Canberra Law School (University of Canberra). Dr Bonython has graduate
qualifications in molecular genetics and law, with a background in
health research, public administration and policy development. She
serves on government and professional committees, in addition to
providing invited expert testimony to a range of legislative and law
reform inquiries. Dr Bonython's work has appeared in leading Australian
and overseas law journals, including studies of the interaction between
tort law and practitioner regulation, tort theory and law's
understanding of property in bodies and intangibles. Her research
encompasses professional and public understandings of risk, harm and
innovation.

**Rachelle Bosua** is Assistant Professor in the Business Process
Management & IS Dept of the Management Science and Technology Faculty at
the Open University of The Netherlands. She is also an Honorary Senior
Fellow in the Department of Computing and Information Systems (CIS) at
the University of Melbourne. She is co-author of the book *Knowledge
Management in organizations: a critical introduction* (Oxford University
Press 2018). Her research focuses on data and information privacy that
relates to human behavior and the use of information and communication
technologies.

**Ellen Broad** is Head of Technical Delivery, Consumer Data Standards
at CSIRO\'s Data61. Previous roles include Head of Policy for the Open
Data Institute (ODI), an international non-profit founded by Sir Tim
Berners-Lee and Sir Nigel Shadbolt, and adviser to senior UK government
minister Elisabeth Truss on data, both in the UK. She has also held
roles as Manager of Digital Policy and Projects for the International
Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (Netherlands) and
Executive Officer for the Australian Digital Alliance. Ellen has written
and spoken about AI, open data and data sharing issues in the New
Scientist, the Guardian and a range of technology publications, and is
the author of *MADE BY HUMANS: The AI Condition* published by Melbourne
University Publishing (MUP) in August 2018.

**Anna Bruce** is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Photovoltaic and
Renewable Energy Engineering at UNSW and Research Coordinator
(Engineering) at the Centre for Energy and Environmental Markets. Her
research focuses on energy transitions, including renewable and
distributed energy system and energy market modelling. Current research
projects include Energy Data for Smart Decision Making through the
Australian Government's Smart Cities and Suburbs Program, and Integrated
Smart Home Energy Management Technologies through the CRC-P program. She
participates as an Australian expert in the IEA's Photovoltaic Power
Systems and Demand Side Management technology collaboration programs.

**Stephanie Carroll Rainie** (Ahtna Athabascan), MPH, DrPH, is Assistant
Professor, Public Health Policy and Management at the Community,
Environment and Policy Department, Mel and Enid Zuckerman College of
Public Health; Assistant Research Professor, Udall Center for Studies in
Public Policy (UC); Associate Director and Manager -- Tribal Health
Program for the Native Nations Institute (http://nni.arizona.edu/) in
the UC; and Assistant Director for the Center for Indigenous
Environmental Health Research(http://ciehr.arizona.edu/), MEZCOPH at
the University of Arizona (UA). Stephanie's research explores the links
between governance, health care, the environment, and community
wellness. Stephanie is the co-founder of the United States Indigenous
Data Sovereignty Network and the International Indigenous Data
Sovereignty Interest Group at the Research Data Alliance.  

**Donna Cormack **(Kāti Mamoe, Kai Tahu) is a Senior Lecturer and
researcher with joint positions at Te Kupenga Hauora Māori, University
of Auckland and Te Rōpū Rangahau Hauora a Eru Pōmare, Univeristy of
Otago. Donna has had a long-standing interest in data issues,
particularly as they relate to measuring and monitoring Māori health and
ethnic health inequities. She is a member of the Te Mana Raraunga Māori
Data Sovereignty Network. 

**Karin Clark** is a Senior Fellow (Melbourne Law Masters) at the
University of Melbourne. Previously, she was Special Counsel with the
Melbourne office of the Allens law firm and practised in the firm's
Communications, Media and Technology Practice Group specialising in
advising on compliance with privacy laws.

**Tyng-Ruey Chuang** is an Associate Research Fellow at the Institute of
Information Science, Academia Sinica (Taipei, Taiwan) with a joint
appointment at both the Research Center for Information Technology
Innovation and the Research Center for Humanities and Social Sciences.
He was trained as a computer scientist (PhD, NYU 1993) and has been
working with ecologists, historians and legal scholars to make better
use of research data. He serves on the Executive Committee of CODATA
(The Committee on Data for Science and Technology) at the International
Science Council. He is also a member of CODATA\'s International Data
Policy Committee.

**Angela Daly** is a critical socio-legal scholar of the regulation of
new technologies. She is currently based in the Chinese University of
Hong Kong Faculty of Law and holds adjunct positions at Queensland
University of Technology Faculty of Law (Australia) and the Tilburg
Institute of Law, Technology and Society (Netherlands). She is the
author of *Private Power, Online Information Flows and EU Law: Mind the
Gap* (Hart 2016) and *Socio-Legal Aspects of the 3D Printing Revolution*
(Palgrave Macmillan 2016).

**S Kate Devitt** is a philosopher and cognitive scientist working as a
social and ethical robotics researcher for the Australian Defence
Science and Technology Group. She is an Adjunct Fellow in the
Co-Innovation Group, School of Information Technology and Electrical
Engineering, University of Queensland. Her research includes: the ethics
of data, barriers to the adoption of technologies, the trustworthiness
of autonomous systems and philosophically designed tools for
evidence-based, collective decision making.

**Martin Flintham** is an Assistant Professor of Computer Science at the
University of Nottingham, where he is a member of the Mixed Reality Lab
and Horizon Digital Economy Research Institute. His research focus on
deploying and studying interactive experiences and disruptive technology
probes, including domains such as the Internet of Things, ubiquitous
computing, mixed reality and games. He has led successful 'in the wild'
collaborations with the creative industries, leading to several
highly-cited publications at ACM CHI, and winning the Prix Ars
Electronica and two BAFTA nominations.

**Murray Goulden** is an Assistant Professor of Sociology at the
University of Nottingham, and current holder of a Nottingham Research
Fellowship. Through the Fellowship he is exploring the sociological
implications of Internet of Things technologies for domestic life. His
most recent work addresses the political economy of the 'smart home',
and the implications of IoT-generated 'interpersonal data' for intimate
social groups. He has worked extensively on research applying novel
digital technologies to real world settings, with a focus on networking,
digital data, and smart energy, their role in reconfiguring associated
social practices, and the implications for policy making and design.

**Timothy Graham** is Postdoctoral Fellow in Sociology and Computer
Science at the Australian National University. His research combines
computational methods with social theory to describe, explain, and
predict the dynamics of social systems. He is currently a Chief
Investigator of an ARC Discovery Project that utilises large-scale
hyperlink network analysis and web experiments to comparatively assess
the government web presence of 10 high-tech countries. He develops open
source software tools for the analysis of socially-generated data, and
has published in journals such as Information, Communication & Society,
Information Polity, Big Data & Society, and Critical Social Policy.

**Daniel Gray** (\@DanielGray00) is a PhD researcher based at Cardiff
University, United Kingdom. His undergraduate and postgraduate studies
have focused on critical discursive approaches to social media. At the
time of writing this takes the form of an analysis of neoliberal and
misogynistic discourse on Twitter, blending big data and computational
methods with critical, qualitative research. His research interests are
focused on Marxist and radical approaches to digital sociology,
particularly political, ethical and methodological issues on social
media. More generally, his interests also include the intersections of
radical left politics and Christianity, and teaching in university.

**Jonathan Gray** is Lecturer in Critical Infrastructure Studies at the
Department of Digital Humanities, King's College London, where he is
currently writing a book on data worlds. He is also Cofounder of the
Public Data Lab; and Research Associate at the Digital Methods
Initiative (University of Amsterdam) and the médialab (Sciences Po,
Paris). More about his work can be found at jonathangray.org and he
tweets at \@jwyg.

**Miren Gutiérrez** (\@gutierrezmiren) holds a PhD in Communication
Studies. She is the Director of the postgraduate program 'Analysis,
Research and Data Communication' and lectures on Communication at the
University of Deusto and is a guest lecturer at the University of
Navarra. She is also an Associate Researcher at the Overseas Development
Institute (ODI) in London and DATACTIVE at the University of Amsterdam.
Her interest is data activism or how people and organizations use data
infrastructure, in combination with other technologies, for social
change, equality and environmental conservation. She is also the author
of the book *Data activism and social change (*Palgrave Macmillan 2018).

**Chih-hsing Ho** is Assistant Research Fellow at Academia Sinica,
Taiwan. Her research focuses on the nexus of law and medicine in
general, with particular attention to the governance of genomics and
newly emerging technologies, such as big data, biobanks and artificial
intelligence (AI). She is currently a Co-PI in law for a health cloud
project in Taiwan and is responsible for designing an adequate
regulatory framework for the secondary use of health data and data
linkage. She holds a PhD in law from the London School of Economics
(LSE), a LLM from Columbia Law School, and a JSM from Stanford
University. 

**Becky Kazansky** is a PhD candidate with the DATACTIVE project at the
University of Amsterdam. She has a joint affiliation with the Media
Studies and Political Science departments, additionally serving on the
ethics committee of the Informatics Institute. Her research focuses on
resistance to surveillance amidst datafication, looking specifically at
practices that try to predict and preempt surveillance. Alongside her
academic research, she has worked for a decade with different human
rights and social justice organisations on technology issues.

**Declan Kuch** is a Research Fellow in the School of Humanities and
Languages at UNSW. His research is motivated by problems of reconciling
public values, technoscience and democracy in an era characterized by
profound environmental constraints. His research spans climate change,
energy policy and the social dimensions of the life sciences, and his
primary role is as a co-leader of the Social Dimensions stream of the
ARC Centre of Excellence in Convergent Bio-Nano Science and Technology.
He is the author of *The Rise and Fall of Carbon Emissions Trading*
(Palgrave Climate Energy and Environment Series 2015).

**Tahu Kukutai** (Ngāti Tīpa, Ngāti Kinohaku, Te Aupōuri) is Professor
of Demography at the National Institute of Demographic and Economic
Analysis, University of Waikato. Tahu specialises in Māori and
Indigenous demographic research and has written extensively on issues of
Māori population change, Māori identity and official statistics. Tahu is
a founding member of the Māori Data Sovereignty Network Te Mana Raraunga
and co-editor (with John Taylor) *of Indigenous Data Sovereignty: Toward
an Agenda* (ANU Press 2016). She was previously a journalist. 

**Danny Lämmerhirt** is researcher and research coordinator at Open
Knowledge International. His work focuses on the sociology of
quantification, metrics and policy, data ethnography, and the data
commons. Among other activities, he leads the methodology around the
Global Open Data Index and co-chairs the measurement and accountability
working group at the Open Data Charter. Working at the intersection
between practice and theory, he explores the 'social life of metrics'
and how metrics intervene and reshape organisational cultures and vice
versa.  He shares his work on Twitter \@danlammerhirt.

**Vanessa Lee** (Yupungathi and Meriam people, Cape York and the Torres
Strait), is a social epidemiologist and senior academic within the
discipline of Behavioural and Social Sciences in the Faculty of Health
Sciences at University of Sydney. Vanessa's overarching focus addresses
the social issues of the burden of disease to break the cycle of
inequality that potentially lead to suicide in First Nations
communities, and to strengthen the health and wellness of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander cultural identity, particularly for women. She is
a founding member of the Indigenous Data Sovereignty group in Australia
- Maiam nayri Wingara. 

**Raymond Lovett **(Wongaibon/Ngiyampaa) is an Associate Professor and
leader of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health program at
the National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, Research
School of Population Health, the Australian National University. Ray is
a social epidemiologist with extensive experience in health services
research, public health policy development and health program
evaluation. He is a founding member of the Indigenous Data Sovereignty
group in Australia (Maiam nayri Wingara) and is a member of
the International Indigenous Data Sovereignty Interest group at the
Research Data Alliance. 

**Iain MacGill** is an Associate Professor in the School of Electrical
Engineering and Telecommunications at the University of New South Wales,
and Joint Director (Engineering) for the University's Centre for Energy
and Environmental Markets (CEEM). Iain's teaching and research interests
include electricity industry restructuring and the Australian National
Electricity Market, sustainable energy generation technologies,
renewable and distributed energy integration, energy efficiency and
demand-side participation, and broader energy and climate policy
opportunities and challenges.  

**Daniel McNamara** is a PhD candidate in the Research School of
Computer Science at the Australian National University. He is affiliated
with the Machine Learning Research Group at CSIRO Data61. Daniel\'s
research interests include fair machine learning and representation
learning. He was a visiting student researcher during 2016-17 at the
Carnegie Mellon University Machine Learning Department, supported by a
Fulbright Postgraduate Scholarship. His work experience includes roles
as a campaign data specialist at the Australian Labor Party, as a
management consultant at the Nous Group, and as an intern at Microsoft
and Google.

**Monique Mann** is the Vice Chancellor's Research Fellow in Technology
and Regulation at the Faculty of Law, Queensland University of
Technology. Dr Mann is advancing a program of socio-legal research on
the intersecting topics of algorithmic justice, police technology,
surveillance, and transnational online policing.

**Luke Marshall** is a PhD student in the School of Photovoltaics and
Renewable Energy Engineering and Centre for Energy and Environmental
Markets in the University of New South Wales. His research centres on
the intersection between energy market rules, and the integration of
solar resources into the electricity grid. He loves to code (including
projects such as http://energyopensource.org/) and also to surf.

**Nikita Melashchenko** is a PhD Candidate at Victoria University of
Wellington. He focuses on intellectual property and regulatory theory in
application to the knowledge economy. His dissertation examines data
localization policies under the WTO law. Nikita is a Fulbright alumnus
and earned degrees from Vanderbilt University (LLM) and SPbU (LLB &
LLM). Before joining the academy he practiced in the field of law and
technology.

**Stefania Milan** (stefaniamilan.net) is Associate Professor of New
Media at the University of Amsterdam. Her work explores the intersection
of digital technology, governance and activism, with emphasis on
critical data practices and autonomous infrastructure. Stefania is the
Principal Investigator of the DATACTIVE project, funded with a Starting
Grant of the European Research Council (639379) and exploring the
evolution of citizenship and participation vis-à-vis datafication and
surveillance (data-activism.net), and of the spin-off ALEX project (ERC
Proof of Concept 825974). She is the author of *Social Movements and
Their Technologies: Wiring Social Change* (Palgrave Macmillan 2013/2016)
and co-author of *Media/Society* (Sage 2011).

**Cheng Soon Ong** is a principal research scientist at the Machine
Learning Research Group, Data61, CSIRO(http://data61.csiro.au/). He is
also an Adjunct Associate Professor at the Australian National
University. His PhD in Computer Science was completed at the Australian
National University in 2005. He was a postdoc at the Max Planck
Institute of Biological Cybernetics and the Fredrich Miescher Laboratory
in Tübingen, Germany. From 2008 to 2011, he was a lecturer in the
Department of Computer Science at ETH Zurich, and in 2012 and 2013 he
worked in the Diagnostic Genomics Team at NICTA in Melbourne. Since
2014, Cheng Soon is researching ways to enable scientific discovery by
extending statistical machine learning methods with the Machine Learning
Research Group in Data61, CSIRO in Canberra. Prior to his PhD, he
researched and built search engine and Bahasa Malaysia technologies at
Mimos Berhad, Malaysia. He obtained his B.E. (Information Systems) and
B.Sc. (Computer Science) from the University of Sydney, Australia.

**Sefa Ozalp** is a research assistant and a PhD student at the Social
Data Science Lab, Cardiff University. His main research interests are
computational sociology and computational criminology, particularly
focusing on dissemination of multiple typologies of cyberhate and
xenophobia on social media platforms. He is also interested in
regulation of digital platforms and abuse of personal (meta)data by
oppressive regimes, focusing particularly on Turkey.

**Rob Passey** is a Senior Research Associate at the Centre for Energy
and Environmental Markets (CEEM), and Postdoctoral Fellow at the School
of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering (SPREE), both at UNSW
Sydney. He is also a Senior Consultant with ITP Renewables, and Policy
Analyst and Treasurer at the Australian PV Institute. He focuses on
policy research and analysis, particularly renewable energy, distributed
energy resources, energy efficiency and carbon pricing.  He has
published widely on market-like policies to reduce greenhouse emissions,
the uptake of low emission technologies and energy efficiency, as well
as distributed generation and its integration into electricity networks,
including smart grids.

**Chiara Poletti** (\@ccpollon) is an ESRC funded PhD researcher in the
School of Social Sciences at Cardiff University. Her research interests
cover digital rights, digital labour, cybersecurity, digital
methodologies and ethics of research on big data. In the last years, she
has been working on Internet governance, social media platforms and big
data. Her PhD project focuses on the discursive and socio-economic
aspects of social media platforms\' content regulation. Previously, she
studied the public discourse on social media platforms in the aftermath
of terrorist attacks. She is one of the co-founders and chair of the
Digital Stuff Post Graduate research group in Cardiff University
(https://digitalstuffcardiff.com).

**Colin Porlezza** is Senior Lecturer in Journalism with the Department
of Journalism at City, University of London. He is also a Visiting
Professor at the Institute of Media and Journalism at the Università
della Svizzera italiana. His research focuses on data journalism, media
accountability and transparency, as well as innovation in digital
journalism. His research so far has resulted in more than 30
peer-reviewed publications. He is a Board Member of the Swiss
Association of Communication and Media Research (SACM) and a founding
member of the European Journalism Observatory. He has featured on the
the Swiss Public Service Broadcaster SRG SSR, Poynter, the Neue Zürcher
Zeitung and other news outlets.

**Dominic Price** is a researcher at the Horizon Digital Economy
Research Institute at the University of Nottingham. His research focuses
on the software engineering aspect of Human-Computer Interaction and the
development of platforms that bridge the gap between system level
computing and human interfaces. He has most recently been involved in
work in the areas of crowd-sourcing and social-networking.

**Paula Restrepo** is an Associate Professor at the Department of Social
Communication, Faculty of Communication, Universidad de Antioquia,
Medellín, Colombia. She has a degree in Anthropology and a Masters in
Philosophy from Universidad de Antioquia, and a PhD in Philosophy from
the Basque Country University. She is a member of the Research Group
'Grupo de investigación Comunicación Periodismo y Sociedad' at Facultad
de Comunicaciones, Universidad de Antioquia UdeA, Calle 70 No. 52-21,
Medellín, Colombia. This chapter is a product of the Project "Prácticas
comunicativas de la agricultura urbana en Medellín" (cod. 2016-12689)
approved by Convocatoria Programática 2016, from the Universidad de
Antioquia.

**Megan Richardson** is a Professor of Law, Co-Director of the Centre
for Media and Communications Law, and Director of the Intellectual
Property Research Institute of Australia at the University of Melbourne.
Recent books include *The Right to Privacy: Origins and Influence of a
Nineteenth-Century Idea* (Cambridge University Press 2017), and she is
currently writing an *Advanced Introduction to Privacy Law* (Edward
Elgar, forthcoming 2020).

**Gerard Jan Ritsema** **van Eck** is a PhD researcher at the Security,
Technology, and *e*-Privacy (ST*e*P) research group at the University of
Groningen. His research focuses on participatory surveillance and
privacy issues in public spaces. In particular, he is interested in how
new and rapidly evolving technologies, such as smartphones and
predictive analytics, enable states and large corporations to enrol
citizens as data gatherers. His work combines insights from sociology
and surveillance studies with work on European (Union) data protection
law to generate new insights on the changing nature of urban public
spaces.

**Mike Roberts** is a Research Associate at the Centre for Energy and
Environmental Markets (CEEM) and in the School of Photovoltaic and
Renewable Energy Engineering (SPREE) at UNSW Sydney. His research
interests include technical and policy aspects of integration of
distributed renewable generation, storage and demand management,
co-operative approaches to energy planning, including embedded networks,
micro grids and community renewable energy, and solar potential
assessment. Mike's doctoral thesis explored opportunities for
photovoltaics and storage in multi-occupancy residential buildings.

**Adam Steer** is a serial multi-disciplinarian, whose career has ranged
from neurophysiology laboratories to web site management to professional
bicycle repair to Antarctic logistics, sea ice field research and most
recently working on massive high resolution geospatial data management.
The intersection of technology and human evolution is a key driver in
Adam's outlook on science and data and life - looking at when we cast
human problems as engineering problems, and how we can become better
humans in order to build a better future. He runs the consultancy
Spatialised (http://spatialised.net).

**Naomi Stringer** is undertaking a PhD in the School of Photovoltaics
and Renewable Energy Engineering and Centre for Energy and Environmental
Markets in the University of New South Wales. Her research is driven by
a fascination with the opportunities and challenges afforded by
distributed energy resources (namely rooftop PV and home battery
systems) and research interests include the technical, social and
regulatory aspects of distributed energy integration. Her current work
examines the behaviour of rooftop solar PV systems during major
electricity system disturbances. Undertaken in collaboration with the
Australian Energy Market Operator and solar monitoring company, Solar
Analytics, her work is heavily data driven.

**Guillén Torres** joined DATACTIVE as a PhD candidate to develop a
project on how data mediates the interaction between organised citizens
and the state. His main areas of interest are transparency, resistance
and the anthropology of the state. He also serves as an advisor to the
Mexican NGO ControlYourGovernment. He has a background in Urban Studies
and Sociology and is a recidivist Actor-Network Theory enthusiast.

**Claire Trenham** has research and data experience spanning a range of
physical sciences, including radio astronomy, ocean waves, and climate
models, as well as substantial experience more broadly managing large
scale 'nationally significant' research data collections at the
Australian National Computational Infrastructure. Claire currently works
for CSIRO's Climate Science Centre in the Sea level rise, waves and
coastal extremes team alongside the regional climate team. Claire is
heavily involved in climate modelling, data processing, data preparation
and software to enhance science capabilities, as well as supervising
student volunteers in historical data digitisation. Claire has a passion
for making maths and science fun, relevant and accessible.

**Lachlan Urquhart** is a Lecturer in Technology Law at the University
of Edinburgh. He is also a visiting researcher at the Horizon Digital
Economy Research Institute, where he was a Research Fellow in
Information Technology Law from 2016-2018. He is a multidisciplinary
researcher, having degrees in both law and computer science, with an
LL.B, (Hons) from University of Edinburgh, an LL.M in IT & Telecoms Law
(Distinction) from University of Strathclyde and & a Ph.D in Human
Computer Interaction from University of Nottingham. He works at the
boundaries of information technology law (mainly privacy & information
security), HCI, and computer ethics. His research mainly considers
the technical, legal, social, and ethical implications of living with
ambient interactive computing.

**Juan Carlos Valencia** is an Associate Professor of Communication at
Universidad Javeriana in Bogotá, Colombia. He holds a degree in
Electronics Engineering and a Masters in Communication from Universidad
Javeriana, and a PhD from the Department of Music, Media and Cultural
Studies at Macquarie University (Australia). He is a member of the
Research Group 'Comunicación, medios y cultura' at Universidad
Javeriana.

**Karin van Es** is an Assistant Professor at Utrecht University and
coordinator of the Datafied Society research platform. Her current
research interests revolve around tool criticism and public values in
the digital age. Karin is author of the book *The Future of Live*
(Polity Press 2016), co-editor of the volume *The Datafied Society* (AUP
2017) and the issue 'Big Data Histories' (2018) for TMG-Journal for
Media History. She has published in outlets such as Television & New
Media, Media, Culture & Society, M/C Journal and First Monday. Her
publications cover critical data studies, social media, and the concept
liveness.

**Daniela van Geenen** is a Lecturer and researcher in data journalistic
practice and data visualization at the University of Applied Sciences
Utrecht and an affiliated researcher at the Datafied Society research
platform. Her work tackles the question of the scholarly conduct that
the work with digital methods demands, challenged by the need to design
accountable software tools. She wrote her MA thesis on tool criticism
investigating the case of Gephi. Daniela published on the role of social
and technical actors on social media platforms, and their meaning for
social and political practices such as public debate and cultural
consumption.

**Jelmer van Nuss** is a developer at the Digital Humanities Lab at
Utrecht University and a computing science master's student at Utrecht
University. He specializes in artificial intelligence with a particular
interest in data science. His work at the Digital Humanities Lab
consists of supporting humanities researchers by providing software and
tools for their research.

**Lonneke van der Velden** is a postdoctoral researcher with DATACTIVE
and a Senior Lecturer at the Department of Media Studies at the
University of Amsterdam. Her work deals with surveillance and data
activism, with a special focus on Open Source Intelligence. She is part
of the editorial board of Krisis: Journal for contemporary philosophy in
the Netherlands and is on the Board of Directors of the Dutch digital
rights organisation Bits of Freedom.

**Jennifer Walker** (Haudenosaunee), PhD, is a Canada Research Chair in
Indigenous Health and Assistant Professor, School of Rural and Northern
Health, Laurentian University. She is the Indigenous Lead at the
Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences in Ontario, Canada. Jennifer
works to support and advance the governance and use of population health
data by Indigenous nations to address community health and wellbeing.
Her program of research integrates Indigenous perspectives on
multi-morbidity and culturally safe care for Indigenous older adults.
Jennifer is a member of the Indigenous Data Sovereignty Interest group
at the Research Data Alliance.  

**Jeb Webb** is a research fellow at Australia's Oceania Cyber Security
Centre, which works in partnership with the University of Oxford's
Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre to conduct maturity reviews for
countries in the Oceania region. He received a Bachelor of Arts in
Political Science from the University of California at Berkeley, a
Master of Arts in Intelligence Studies from American Military
University, and a PhD from the University of Melbourne\'s School of
Engineering (Department of Computing and Information Systems).

**Maranke Wieringa** is a PhD candidate at Utrecht University and has a
background in Cultural Studies and Media Studies, with a specialization
in software and data. Her dissertation investigates algorithmic
accountability in Dutch municipalities, and, following from this
insight, Maranke develops a toolkit to empower municipal data
professionals to give testimony of the (decisions around the) algorithm.
At Utrecht University, Maranke is part of the Datafied Society research
platform, and teaches various courses on (scholarly) data analysis. Her
academic interests lie at the intersection of software and data (e.g.
tool criticism, algorithm studies).

**Kersti Wissenbach** (kerstiwissenbach.com) is a researcher and senior
consultant working on the crossroads of communication, governance,
responsible data, and civic tech. She is specialised in participatory
methods and has worked with activist groups, NGOs, and government
institutions in over 15 countries. Since 2011 Kersti runs her own
consulting firm providing strategy and policy advice and facilitating
co-creation processes. Kersti lectures in the Communication for
Development Master of Malmö University. She is a researcher with the
DATACTIVE project where she merges social movement and communication for
social change scholarship for her study of power dynamics within
transnational civic tech activism.

**Sharon Young** has recently submitted her PhD thesis to the University
of New South Wales, investigating the influence of tariffs on the
impacts of decentralised energy resources on the Australian electricity
industry and is currently working with the Centre for Energy and
Environmental Markets (CEEM).

**Andrea Zeffiro** is an Assistant Professor in the Department of
Communication Studies and Multimedia, and Academic Director for the
Lewis & Ruth Sherman Centre for Digital Scholarship at McMaster
University.
