---
Pr-id: Publications
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 29
Type: book
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: u
Article-title: Good Data
Article-status: accepted
Author: Editors: Angela Daly, S. Kate Devitt, Monique Mann 
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   In recent years, there has been an exponential increase in the collection, aggregation and automated analysis of information by government and private actors, and in response to this there has been a significant critique regarding what could be termed ‘bad’ data practices in the globalised digital economy. 
In order to paint an alternative, more optimistic but still pragmatic picture of the datafied future, this book examines and proposes ‘good data’ practices, values and principles from an interdisciplinary, international perspective. From ideas of data sovereignty and justice, to manifestos for change and calls for activism, this collection opens a multifaceted conversation on the kinds of futures we want to see, and presents concrete steps on how we can start realising good data in practice.
Keywords:   data, datafication, data collection, data practice, sovereignty, activism
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 1. What is (in) Good Data?
*Monique Mann, S. Kate Devitt and Angela Daly*

## 1. Introduction: Why Good Data?

In recent years, there has been an exponential increase in the
collection, aggregation and automated analysis of information by
government and private actors. In response to this there has been
significant critique regarding what could be termed 'bad' data practices
in the globalised digital economy. These include the mass gathering of
data about individuals, in opaque, unethical and at times illegal ways,
and the increased use of that data in unaccountable and discriminatory
forms of algorithmic decision-making.

This edited collection has emerged from our frustration and depression
over the previous years of our academic and activist careers critiquing
these dystopian 'Bad Data' practices. Rather, in this text on 'Good
Data' we seek to move our work from critique to imagining and
articulating a more optimistic vision of the datafied future. We see
many previous considerations of Bad Data practices, including our own,
as only providing critiques rather than engaging constructively with a
new vision of how digital technologies and data can be used productively
and justly to further social, economic, cultural and political goals.
The objective of the Good Data project is to start a multi-disciplinary
and multi-stakeholder conversation around promoting good and ethical
data practices and initiatives, towards a fair and just digital economy
and society. In doing so, we combine expertise from various disciplines
and sectors, including law, criminology, justice, public health, data
science, digital media, and philosophy. The contributors to this text
also have expertise in areas such as renewable energy, sociology, social
media, digital humanities, and political science. There are many fields
of knowledge that need to come together to build the Good Data future.
This project has also brought together academic, government and industry
experts along with rights advocates and activists to examine and propose
initiatives that seeks to promote and embed social justice, due process
rights, autonomy, freedom from discrimination and environmental
sustainability principles.

We acknowledge that we are not the first people to start thinking about
ethical data and data justice.[^01chapter1_1] But we view 'Good Data' as being a
broader, and more open-ended, idea than data ethics or data justice,
which may confine the conversation, for instance, to philosophical
questions or a consideration of 'inserting' ethics in technical aspects,
and not engage with wider political, historical, social, cultural,
technological and economic issues.

We also wanted to take a more global approach to Good Data given much of
the discussion and critique on data practices emanates from the Global
North/West, in the spirit of creating and supporting Southern
scholarship about data issues.[^01chapter1_2] In this edited text there are
contributions from five continents which we view as a step towards
broadening the good and ethical data discussions out from the Global
North/West, although we acknowledge our position of privilege as
academics based in the 'Global North-in-South'.[^01chapter1_3] Furthermore, we
acknowledge limitations of the book in this regard that we do not have a
contribution from the African continent, and also our choice of language
in the form of English. We hope that in the future Good Data discussions
will be broadened to include more contributions from authors based in
more geographical locations and in more languages than we have managed
with this book.

The Good Data project was developed and initiated by us when we were all
based together at Queensland University of Technology (QUT) in
Brisbane/Meanjin - located on traditional Turbal land in what is now
known as Australia - in late 2017. Each of us had been working on
research engaging with social science aspects of data and digital
technologies, and Angela and Monique had also been very active in
digital rights activism in Australia. The situation in Australia was
then, and still is, far from 'best practice' in data and digital issues
- the lack of an enforceable constitutional right to privacy, the
Australian government's ongoing digital colonialism perpetuated against
Indigenous peoples, refugees and other marginalised people and a myriad
of other ways in which unethical data practices were being
implemented^.^[^01chapter1_4] We had spent a lot of time and energy criticising
these practices from both academic and activist perspectives, but we
realised that we had not presented a positive alternative: how could
data and digital technologies be designed and used in 'good ways', for
'good' purposes? If digitisation and data are inevitabilities, then we
have to (re)imagine the kind of digitised world and data we want to see
rather than only offering a naysaying critique of the status quo.

The Good Data project formally commenced with a multi-stakeholder
workshop hosted by us and funded by the QUT Faculty of Law in late 2017.
We designed the workshop to gather representatives of different academic
disciplines and people who had in some way created, used or implemented
'Good Data' practices. The workshop was invite-only, and we organised an
outreach public event in the evening featuring well-known digital rights
activist Asher Wolf (\@Asher\_Wolf) in conversation. We would like to
thank Thoughtworks Brisbane for hosting our public event and providing
catering for the audience.

We wanted the workshop and public event to be just the beginning of our
enquiry into Good Data. Given the interest and engagement in our
project, we thought that the next step was a book project on Good Data
with an open call for contributions. From the beginning we knew that the
book would have to encompass and showcase Good Data practices itself.
Firstly, we are delighted to be working with the Institute of Network
Cultures (INC) given their commitment to quick open access publishing on
innovative topics related to digital network cultures. So many texts
related to Good Data reside behind paywalls and as a result are not
widely accessible, particularly to those outside of the academy.
Furthermore, with the increasing and all-encompassing datafication of
society and the economy, we were keen to issue this collection on Good
Data in a rapid and timely manner (whose publication is taking place a
little over a year after our initial Good Data workshop). We have
extensive experience ourselves in waiting for our (academic) writing to
see the light of day (often behind a paywall) and so we also appreciated
the speed with which the INC could facilitate this collection getting
out into the world. We also asked contributors for short chapters which
would be accessible to non-specialists in order to widen the book's
appeal.

Perhaps the first question that should be asked when writing a book
about Good Data is what is the nature of 'good'. What is 'goodness'? In
our call for papers we were deliberately agnostic with regards to a
conceptual analysis of 'good' because it intentionally sought
transdisciplinary, culturally diverse and inclusive contributions.
Foundational questions on 'goodness' for society and individuals from a
western philosophical perspective - a perspective in which we ourselves
are situated - might consider 'goodness' as increasing wellbeing
(including hedonic, desire-theories and objective list-based theories),
sustainability, fairness, justice, virtue and so on. For example, how
would a utilitarian or Rawlsian design a smart city? How should app
developers incorporate feminist ethics of care - that prioritises
relationships and responsibilities over the individual - into their
choice architecture? Yet, data discourses from underrepresented,
disenfranchised and disempowered voices need to be prioritised rather
than hegemonic conceptual structures. For example, (how) can autonomous
vehicle data regulation incorporate intersectional feminist or Marxist
political agendas? When and who should participate in radical data
resistance and erasure? We believe this book is just one step into a
long term project of interrogating diverse ethical, cultural and
political theoretical frameworks into data practices.

Since we view 'Good Data' as a discussion which transcends atomised
academic fields, we are pleased to see contributors and contributions to
this book coming from cross/multi/transdisciplinary perspectives.
Another of our aims was to move the discussion on Good Data beyond one
disciplinary or professional sphere, and we are also pleased to see
academics, activists, civil society representatives and technical
experts contribute chapters to this book. Finally, we gave authors the
option to have their chapter peer-reviewed or editor-reviewed. We
thought that the option of editor review would ensure that people from
other fields beyond academia could contribute to the collection.

In the next section we offer an overview of the authors' contributions
to this collection under each theme. We acknowledge that many of the
contributions are relevant to more than one theme, but we have grouped
them as best we can under some headings which give a flavour of the
chapters:

1.  Good Data Manifestos and Practices;
2.  Good Data and Justice;
3.  Good Data as Open and Shared Data;
4.  Good Data Activism and Research; and
5.  Good and Smart Data.

Finally, we would like to offer our sincere thanks to our research and
editorial assistants who have helped us bring this book to fruition. Our
particular thanks go to Dr Kayleigh Murphy and Ms Harley Williamson
without whose hard work and dedication we would not have been able to
complete the book project within such a speedy timeframe. We would also
like to thank Anna Carlson who assisted us at the beginning of the
project and organised a wonderful outdoor public event in November 2017
on 'Data Activism and Digital Rights'[^01chapter1_5] (at which Angela spoke) for
the Brisbane Free University, 'an autonomous space in which the
empowering processes of teaching and learning belong to everybody'.[^01chapter1_6]
Anna also wrote a series of Good Data blogposts for the DATACTIVE Big
Data Sur blog.[^01chapter1_7] Last, but far from least, we would like to thank all
of the peer reviewers who contributed their time and expert insights to
commenting on the peer-reviewed chapters, thereby strengthening the
final versions of the chapters, and this book overall.

## 2. What's in the Good Data book?

**Theme 1: Good Data Manifestos and Practices**

We kick off the book with a selection of manifestos and guidance on what
'Good Data' is, or should be, and how it should be used, or not.

First, in **Chapter 2**, we are delighted to have a multi-authored
contribution on Good Data Practices for Indigenous Data Sovereignty and
Governance from a group of prominent international Indigenous scholars,
namely Raymond Lovett, Vanessa Lee, Tahu Kukutai, Donna Cormack,
Stephanie Carroll Rainie and Jennifer Walker. Indigenous Data
Sovereignty (IDS) and Indigenous Data Governance are Indigenous-led
movements and practices through which Indigenous peoples are setting
their own visions for good data regarding data generated and collected
by and about them. IDS movements and practices can be seen as a
manifestation of Indigenous peoples' sovereignty more generally and as
an alternative vision of data, centreing Indigenous peoples' rights to
self-determination and autonomy.[^01chapter1_8] IDS also challenges conventional,
western colonial data practices, which have been utilised against
Indigenous peoples since colonisation and continue to be used against
them in the digital environment. The authors set out the context for,
and emergence of, IDS movements and provide an overview of IDS
developments including the IDS networks such as Te Mana Raraunga, the
Māori Data Sovereignty Network in Aotearoa/New Zealand.

In **Chapter 3**, we then move to Claire Trenham and Adam Steer's Good
Data Manifesto, which draws on their practical experience as data
scientists working with geospatial data. Their manifesto sets out a
series of 'Good Data' questions that data producers and consumers should
ask, constituting a set of principles which can be used to guide data
collection, storage, and re-use. According to the authors, good data
should be: usable and fit for purpose; collected with respect to humans
and their rights, and the natural world; published; revisable; and form
useful social capital. They draw on various examples to illustrate these
questions and principles, with a focus on geospatial data which is often
voluminous, ubiquitous and also - significant from a data protection
perspective - personal.

**Chapter 4** by Miren Gutiérrez, considers the question of 'good enough
data', particularly for social activism. 'Good enough' is contrasted
with institutional, government or corporate data collection that may be
systematic, but also imbued with control mechanisms to protect data
stakeholders. Good enough data is thus a way to promote the use of data
by grass roots activists and citizens to impose political pressure for
social ends. The author thus defends 'good enough data' as data created,
valued and interpreted by ordinary people, such as environmental data
and citizen sensing. Good enough to sustain ongoing legal
investigations. She offers the example of the Berkeley Human Rights
Investigation Lab (HRC Lab) that used the Syrian archive to categorise
chemical attacks on a Syrian city as evidence for violations of
international humanitarian law as well as violations other regulations
and treaties.

Finally, we turn to our next manifesto in **Chapter 5**, this time for
good energy data, authored by Declan Kuch, Naomi Stringer, Luke
Marshall, Sharon Young, Mike Roberts, Iain MacGill, Anna Bruce and Rob
Passey. The authors are Australia-based energy researchers who view a
close link between access to energy data and the country's transition to
a sustainable and just community-based energy future, which they argue
is currently hampered by some major incumbent energy sector businesses
and politicians. Rooftop solar (PV) panels are popular additions to
Australian homes but individuals do not have access to the data about
the energy they produce and consume. Access to this data would empower
individuals and collectives such as community energy groups, and
accordingly could hasten Australia's take-up and implementation of
sustainable energy in a sustainable, communal way. The authors provide a
series of recommended actions in their manifesto which would lead to
this goal.

**Theme 2: Good Data and Justice**

Data justice is a term which has become very prominent in recent times.
We acknowledge in particular the work of the Data Justice Lab based at
Cardiff University,[^01chapter1_9] and their conceptualisation of 'data justice' as
'a conceptual foundation for exploring how data-driven surveillance
implicates different understandings of social justice as well as a
potential action-building tool for addressing such implications'.[^01chapter1_10]
We also acknowledge Taylor's work on elucidating a concept of
international data justice based on three 'pillars' of '(in)visibility,
(dis)engagement with technology and antidiscrimination'.[^01chapter1_11]

The chapters in this theme contribute to, and extend, the idea of data
justice, through case studies on data justice topics in different areas
such as criminal justice, genomics and cross-border data flows. We see
these chapters as also contributing to discussions on digital
criminology,[^01chapter1_12] by widening the discipline's traditional focus beyond
'The Cyber' and cybercrime to look at wider socio-political contexts of
digital citizenship.

What is meant by 'fairness' is a central consideration in 'Good Data.'
This question is addressed by McNamara, Graham, Broad, and Ong on
(racial) bias[^01chapter1_13] in **Chapter 6** that examines actuarial models of
criminal justice. McNamara and colleagues examine assumptions that
underpin recidivism prediction methods in Australia, with the objective
of identifying and rectifying bias, specifically in relation to domestic
violence cases. Significantly, the authors draw attention to the
politics of data collection and statistical inference. For example, they
question Indigenous status being selected as a predictor variable, and
argue that the social context of algorithmic decision-making is an
important determinant of outcomes in criminal justice. Their examination
of the predictive validity of risk assessment tools demonstrates that
there are serious consequences for 'trade-offs' in adopting various
definitions of 'fairness'. Accordingly, the authors re-design the
predictive model in order to reduce the discriminatory impact of the
model towards Indigenous persons, yet this comes at the 'trade-off' of
reduced predictive accuracy. With these findings identified, the authors
outline various approaches to algorithmic fairness in all stages of data
collection and processing. Their analysis demonstrates the importance of
incorporating explicit fairness criterion into predictive models - and
making trade-offs in fairness explicit - as Good Data practice.

Ozalp's chapter - **Chapter 7** - presents a detailed case study of the
ByLock case concerning unlawful data access leading to mass persecution
of dissidents in Turkey. Through the lens of moral panic analysis Ozalp
recounts a case study of what can go bad without good information
security, providing a concrete real world example of the oppressive
potential of bad data practices, and while questioning what we can learn
for Good Data. In doing so, Ozalp outlines how digital communication
technologies and strong information security are essential to support
what he terms a 'good democracy' -- including protection for the rights
such as freedom of expression, political thought, religion, association
and privacy. Accordingly, it is argued that counter-surveillance
practices, online anonymity and encryption tools are integral to a good
democracy.

Next under the data justice theme is **Chapter 8:** Arnold and
Bonython's examination of genomic data. They argue that recent
technological developments in this area, a 'perfect storm' may be
brewing where governments want to implement population-wide genomic
databases, private corporations attempt to commodify genomic data
through the intellectual property system, and direct-to-consumer genomic
testing opens a Pandora's Box of legal, political and ethical issues.
Their chapter is a timely and crucial contribution to conceptualising
'Good Data' in this area. Underpinning 'goodness' regarding genomic data
is, according to the authors, a fundamental respect for human dignity
which ought to manifest, for instance, in truly consensual, fair and
transparent data collection and use. The authors also emphasise an
'ethic of responsibility' regarding genomic data which ought to be
implemented in various ways, including through regulation and government
intervention, professional codes, public education, and decision-making
by public bodies funding research and development in this area.

The final contribution to this section is **Chapter 9**, where
Melashchenko tackles the contentious issue of data localisation,[^01chapter1_14] or
stipulations that data be physically held on machines within the
territory of a particular country or jurisdiction. Data localisation
policies in some countries evidence the materiality of data. Data does
not have an ethereal existence but exists in a physical location. This
is significant as principles of territoriality underpin the state's
legitimacy to police and govern. The issue of data localisation goes to
the heart of (digital) geopolitics and legal geographies of digital
technologies, since it may or may not be desirable from different
perspective for data to be held in a particular country, or for it to be
held 'offshore' in order to evade certain laws and policies.
Melashchenko considers data localisation in the context of trade, data
justice and privacy. He identifies that data localisation policies are
far from a monolith and may differ in their intensity and detail, and
accordingly maps out some 'variables' and 'types' of these policies.
This is followed by the introduction of some normative criteria against
which data localisation policies can be assessed as being 'smart data
regulation' which facilitates data justice, and ultimately a vision of
Good Data.

**Theme 3: Good Data as Open and Shared Data**

Our next theme centres ideas of open data and shared data as forms of
Good Data. Discussions of open data have preceded much of the
contemporary focus on privacy as being a main 'Good Data' issue,
although concerns about the unintended consequences of (some) open data
for privacy and other rights are now prominent. Reconciling tensions
between open data and data protection (and other interests) is a key
challenge for this area.

In the first chapter in this theme - **Chapter 10** - Gray and
Lämmerhirt consider the social life of the Open Data Index, a civil
society project that aims to measure and influence how much government
data is made available. In particular they attend to how the index
organises participation and data politics, comparing indexes to the
political mobilisiation afforded by rallies, petitions and hashtags.
Indexes represent social facts but also reshape the social world -
quantifying and thus enabling normative claims about data practices of
different countries, and encouraging participation to resolve them. The
Open Data Index aims to intervene around what is considered 'Good Data'
by assessing the extent to which the publication of government data
conforms with specific legal and technical norms and conventions. As a
database about data, it can measure accountability and intervene on
official regimes of quantification and datification. This is relevant to
other chapters considered in the volume including smart cities and good
enough data that consider the role of government versus citizen data and
the role of data activism. The discussion of the role of indexes
(ratings and rankings) is also relevant to the data visualization
chapter that acknowledges the impact of visualisations on the
epistemology of users. Visualizations are heavily employed by indexes to
attempt political and social change (e.g. Corruption Perceptions Index).
The Open Data index chapter is thus able to contribute to a larger
conversation around the importance of empowering citizens with good
data.

We then turn to **Chapter 11**, where Porlezza addresses open source
ethics in data journalism, broadly speaking the use of computer science
and statistical analytic methods in journalism practice, including
programming, data analysis and visualisations to inform reporting. The
author identifies four open source normative concepts to guide activity
in this area, namely transparency, participation, tinkering, and
iteration, which he argues can facilitate Good Data journalism. Drawing
on empirical research conducted with data journalists in Italy and
Switzerland, actual data journalism practices are assessed against these
four concepts to evaluate the extent to which these activities fulfil
and align with open source ethics. Various differences are identified in
how data journalists in both countries approach, adhere to and implement
these ethical principles in their work, which Porlezza mainly attributes
to structural differences between the journalism environment in the two
countries rather than individual journalists' own moral codes.

In the final chapter in this theme**, Chapter 12**, Ho and Chuang
critique neoliberal data protection models which emphasise individual
autonomy and choice through concepts such as consent and anonymisation.
Instead, the authors propose an alternative model for data use and
sharing based on community participation in decision-making and
self-governance, drawing from commoning scholarship and practice, and
computational methods. They look to examples including data cooperatives
to analyse how community participation can occur regarding data
governance, in ways which can facilitate use and sharing of that data
but are also trusted by the collective. In this way, communal data
sharing models present a Good Data alternative to the current widespread
prorprietary and extractive models.

**Theme 4: Good Data Activism and Research**

Ethical research and activism is a key component of 'Good Data'. In an
age of fighting back against Bad Data, government surveillance and
corporate capture of civil society and academia (see for instance
Funding Matters' recent resistance to Palantir's sponsorship of the
Amsterdam Privacy Conference),[^01chapter1_15] it is crucially important for the
Good Data agenda to outline approaches to ethical activism and research.
Chapters within this theme advance and consider what 'Good' activism and
research looks like and outline principled approaches to conducting Good
Data activism and research. Chapters within this theme also consider the
interaction between activists and academics research agendas and outline
models for ethical data-activist collaborations.

The theme's first chapter - **Chapter 13** - by Zeffiro investigates
research ethics boards at funding bodies and universities in Canada and
found that they share a piecemeal approach to research ethics in the
face of changing technologies. She proposes a united effort to create
ethical guidance for using social media data for whole of life-cycle
research that acknowledges the diversity of needs of different
interdisciplinary researchers. At its core researchers must be
transparent about their methodologies for generating, collecting,
processing analysing and storing social media data. Social media data is
likely to be harvested without informed consent, without concern for the
welfare of participants and potentially without sensitivity to
vulnerable or at risk participants. Zeffiro notes that third party
disclaimers on social platforms are not sufficient for ethical and
informed consent by research participants. Participant data accrued from
social media participants must be kept anonymous, yet researchers must
acknowledge that confidentiality cannot be guaranteed for data sent via
the internet by any third parties. Researchers must recognise that their
social media dataset has been generated by human participants who are
likely unaware of how their inputs have been quantified and that they
are complicit with the platforms themselves if they rely on them for
research data. Zeffiro argues that the term 'c/overt research' should be
used by researchers to acknowledge the ethical challenges with
collecting and using social media data and the limitations of research
ethics boards. Zeffiro proposes researchers question who they feel
accountable towards, are self-reflective with regards to their own
situated perspective and identify their duties to participants;
maintaining a flexible and adaptable approach, rather than seeking a
'one-size-fits-all' solution to research.

Writing reflectively from the experiences of the DATACTIVE team at the
University of Amsterdam, in **Chapter 14** Kazansky, Torres, van der
Velden, Wissenbach and Milan consider what data activism research for
the social good could look like aligned with the Good Data agenda. They
question what forms of active and productive roles academics can play in
advancing data activism, and also research agendas. In doing so, they
examine the co-production of knowledge and the specific work of the
DATACTIVE team and their direct involvement as activists with the
communities that they study. Their main contribution is the proposal of
an 'engaged' approach and epistemology to research that aims to
contribute to activist causes -- that is, doing research 'with' rather
than 'about'. They outline an approach to ethical data activist research
as a process rather than a checklist and as inspired by Association of
Internet Researchers (AoIR) ethical codes and feminist ethics of care.

Similarly, in **Chapter 15** Poletti and Gray outline what is 'Good'
when it comes to critical digital studies, and advance an emancipatory
method inspired by Marxist and critical ethical approaches. They argue
that 'Good Data' is that which can be used to critique power dynamics
associated with the use of data, and with a focus on economic and
technological environments and contexts in which they are generated.
They commence their examination by drawing attention to global
informational capitalism and the asymmetric and extractive exploitation
of data by companies such as Google, Facebook, Amazon etc, while
advocating for reflection on the production system where data are
created and collected and sold -- and the tensions between ethical
research and capitalist research (such as, for example, as revealed by
the Facebook-Cambridge Analytica scandal). Poletti and Gray highlight
the challenges to critical researchers in producing valid and ethical
research in a data ecosystem of capitalist production and also that is
formed and exists in cross/multi jurisdictional contexts. Drawing from
the work of Antonio Casilli, Christian Fuchs and Karen Gregory they
propose an approach to critical ethical data research that considers the
economic and political order, and ground data ethics in a critique of
neoliberal economic systems and digital labor and capitalist relations.
They conclude that Good Data are data that can be used to bring about
change in modern informational capitalism, but for this to occur there
is a need to challenge the dominant rhetoric and further reflexivity in
critical digital studies.

In **Chapter 16** Wieringa, van Geenen, van Es and van Nuss focus on a
particular kind of research data communication format: network
visualisations. Network visualisations are used to represent the
geometric interconnectedness and interrelatedness of data, providing a
more nuanced way of experiencing complex data than normal charts, graphs
or tables. However, network visualisations can bias readers into
believing the data presented is objective and complete; rather than
interpretive and limited. The authors argue that the assumptions,
methodologies and justifications behind the visualisation need to be
more transparent and have created a plug-in for common data
visualisation tool 'Gephi' to make them more accountable. Specifically
their fieldnotes plugin allows users to export the details of the
ethnographic, working process, including iterations of the graph file
over time. The authors argue that the plugin is of relevance to critical
data scholars more widely.

**Theme 5: Good and Smart Data**

The book's final theme focuses on the changes ubiquitous
interconnectedness brings to our cities, homes, personal and
interpersonal information ecosystems. Governments, research institutions
and corporations are invested in an innovation agenda that relies on
extensive access to citizen data via smart phones; urban and domestic
surveillance and the Internet of Things (IoT) to create 'smart'
algorithms for 'smart cities' and 'smart homes'. Families, groups and
communities share personal data in homes and online and have collective
interests beyond those of the individual. Technologies are usually
touted as bringing convenience, efficiency, ease and wellbeing
improvements to consumers, often in overtly technological determinist
terms. However, ethical, regulatory and legal frameworks often lag
behind consumer trust in these devices and networks. This theme brings
together authors who consider data activism and citizen protection under
the onslaught of data in private and public spheres. The authors
consider citizen use of public, private and interpersonal data, offering
insights and good data practices to protect individuals and groups.

In the first chapter in this theme, **Chapter 17**, Ritsema van Eck
argues that mapmaking has changed as 'smart cities' gather data via
video, audio, and other kinds of Internet of Things (IoT) sensing
devices. The data-streams they generate can be combined with volunteered
data to create a vast multitude of interactive maps on which individuals
are constantly (re)grouped on the basis of abnormality, deviation, and
desirability. Instead of extending personal data protection rights to
groups - that is awkward within the current European Union data
protection framework, which is the chapter's focus - the author suggests
protection can be achieved via Data Protection Impact Assessments
(DPIAs), which are mandatory to carry out when the 'systematic
monitoring of a publicly accessible area on a large scale' necessary for
mapmaking takes place. DPIAs can identify risks such as discrimination
at an early stage. Furthermore, by including representatives of local
(disadvantaged) groups, the strong performative qualities of maps can
offer occasions for groups of citizens in smart cities to proactively
shape the environments in which they live. However the author
acknowledges that substantial legislative change would be required to
the DPIA process to ensure affected data subjects and their
representatives were included in the consultative process.

Smart cities are promoted as creating more economically thriving, social
and environmentally sustainable cities. However, in **Chapter 18**
Valencia and Restrepo argue that they are usually driven by governments
and corporations that promote a neoliberal, colonialist agenda to retain
power and influence over citizens through increased surveillance and
data secrecy. Citizens' data is collected, analysed and used to drive
political agendas, often without citizen consent or access. The authors
investigate the possibility of citizen led smart cities that could lead
to data empowered citizens. Rather than rejecting datatification, the
authors discuss citizen organisations and resistance communities that
demand open data and the production of citizen-led data and software to
produce bottom-up smart cities instead of top-down. They argue that true
smart cities can only emerge from inclusive and citizen-led social data
practices. They focus particularly on an instance of urban agriculture
in Colombia, where a citizen-led environmental resistance movement
endorses open data and software, citizen-data gathering, digital
activism, community connection and communication. The chapter explores
how data activism can progress an agroecological political agenda and
social movements.

This is followed by **Chapter 19,** in which Bosua, Clark, Richardson
and Webb investigate user control of personal data in a connected
digital world. They argue that the Internet of Things has the
paradoxical result of introducing a new era of 'smart computing' while
reducing the intelligent control that individuals can exercise over
their personal data. Users should be able to exert greater control over
the collection, storage and use of their personal data. In this chapter
the authors provide early design concepts of systems that could improve
personal control of data including privacy, data protection and
cybersecurity. They argue that personal data empowerment can be achieved
through better design that make data flows more transparent to users. In
particular they focus on IoT data that is particularly vulnerable
because it is frequently unencrypted and uncontrolled. They propose
creating an Intelligent Warning App DataMind, using 'privacy-by-design'
principles to incorporate 'nudges' to alert individuals about data
issues of potential interest to them, thereby empowering them to take
control of their personal data.

In **Chapter 20,** the last chapter of the book, Flintham, Goulden,
Price and Urquhart warn of a future in which the Internet of Things
creates group data that overwhelm the efforts of individual group
members to manage personal information that other members have access to
- what they call 'interpersonal data', because it is drawn from, and
carries consequences for, the relationships between intimate groups. The
authors examine European Union law (as the most proactive regulatory
regime in this space) using design fiction methodologies to consider
what good interpersonal data might look like and how to avoid it
becoming 'bad data' through inappropriate design, or legal consequence.
Data in homes is often co-constructed, yet legal protection is
constrained to individualised notions of one user, one device. Homes are
shared spaces between diverse individuals who participate in wide range
of social practices including access to and control of data. These homes
comprise not just nuclear units and are not necessarily safe for all
parties to have agency. The authors point to divorce, break ups and
domestic violence as particular challenges, but also discuss the risks
to the agency of teenagers and children. Thus the specific danger within
homes it is not a distant bad actor who constitutes the greatest threat
but those most intimately connected to individuals. Smart devices
digitise domestic interpersonal relations demonstrating how IoT
technologies carry novel implications for interpersonal relations, and
the data generated around them. Designing smart devices with the law in
mind goes some way towards good data practices, however users have
latitude to change settings that open up new challenges within their
context of use. Data driven technologies must respect interpersonal
relationships, and the distribution of agency amongst them, both
socially and legally. They must also, in doing so, recognise the moral
choices they are making in involving themselves in these spaces, and
redefining their possibilities. The next generation of smart devices
should, potentially, actively and disruptively, deliver data protection
norms into the home including informed and visible transactions around
data and designing personalised privacy interventions. However, given
limited legal protections and fast-paced technological innovation, it is
possible that the best data at home is not smart at all.

## 3. What (else) is Good Data?

We are very pleased to include 20 Chapters of Good Data discussions with
differing perspectives on the question of what Good Data is. But, like
data itself, it is impossible for us to cover everything encompassed by
'Good Data' and accordingly we cannot offer a 'complete',
'comprehensive' or 'perfect' account of good data at this stage (if
indeed ever). This book is but a partial reflection of the 'Good Data'
reality or possibility. But that is exciting because we are just the
beginning of a process of establishing Good Data frameworks, processes
and guidelines.

As we mentioned earlier in this Introduction, we acknowledge that this
book still has a bias to the Global North in the contributions we
received and included in this book, and we also acknowledge that our
choice of language also may have excluded contributions. For Good Data
going forward, a more global approach needs to be taken to the issue,
rather than just (re)centreing perspectives from the Global North, as
already noted -- and critiqued - by Arora.[^01chapter1_16] In order to see more
Global South perspectives on Good Data, and many other topics, Global
North(-in-South) scholars such as ourselves need to take more steps to
be inclusive and facilitate such perspectives, for instance by providing
resources such as translation, access to academic databases and other
assistance to our colleagues and comrades in the Global South. This is a
increasingly crucial as we see a more multi-polar digital world, with
the rise of China as an Internet giant and the large online - and
increasingly datafied - populations of countries such as India (with its
highly controversial Aadhar whole-of-population biometric database),
Indonesia and Nigeria - to name but a few.

In addition to more Global Southern perspectives on Good Data, we also
think that more account should be taken of how Bad Data practices impact
specifically and more acutely on marginalised people and communities,
and that Good Data thinking and practices must taken an intersectional
approach to acknowledging the different and intersecting oppressions
faced by People of Colour, Indigenous people, queer people, and disabled
people. We are very pleased and honoured to have the chapter from Lovett
and others in this book on Indigenous Data Sovereignty. Going forward,
Good Data conversations, including our own, must take more account of
intersectional perspectives.

We would also like to see more scholarship and thinking at various
levels on Good Data in the form of theories, methodologies and practices
for Good Data, in order to gain power for individuals and communities.
While we are critical of technological determinist views of data,
digital technologies and datafication, we do not include much on
technical aspects of data in this book. We do not think that 'only'
'hard-coding' rights, interests, values etc into technology is enough to
ensure Good Data practices; but we also do not think that it is
unimportant either. We would like to see more ideas, discussion and
scholarship, from an interdisciplinary perspective, about how this might
happen. Finally, we have included some domain or sector-specific
contributions in this book on the question and idea of Good Data; but
given that 'Good Data' might look somewhat different in different
contexts, we would also like to see more analysis and recommendations
for specific domains and sectors such as science, agriculture, health
and education.

For us, Good Data also goes beyond the digital, including when studying
the digital as researchers. Social media and other digital data are
tempting for researchers as they offer rich, complex and extensive
insights into human behaviours, attitudes, beliefs and desires. However,
researchers utilising digital data sources such as social media must be
self-reflective regarding their methodologies and acknowledge their
complicity with platform ethical commitments (or lack thereof) when they
benefit from harvested platform data. Researchers also need to
appreciate the limits of data scraped from public sources that may not
reveal a full picture of participant views but instead present a
carefully filtered representation. So the fight is deeper than the
methodologies themselves and indeed extends to challenging various
aspects of the contemporary neoliberal culture of research as a whole. A
call for Good Data for holistically ethical research encourages
researchers to strive towards higher order ethical norms, beyond the
minimum required of 'do not harm' and instead a cry to do more, to 'do
good'.

## 4. Next steps: How do we start building Good Data initiatives? 

An important question following from this book is how do we start to
build, develop and reward Good Data initiatives? This is the logical
next step in the Good Data project: moving from theory and academic
inquiry (as we present in this collection) to progressing initiatives in
practice. Good Data is but the first step in a long journey towards a
just or ethical digital economy and society. With the utmost humility,
we admit that we do not have all the answers to this question, but we
have some ideas as where to place the next steps, and we present them as
open questions in this final section.

There is first and foremost a need to take stock and question what tools
- conceptual, theoretical, practical, legal and technical - that we need
to build the Good Data future. Despite being socio-legal researchers
working within Law Faculties, we do not think that law and regulation is
the solution,[^01chapter1_17] and there are limits to looking to the law (and data
protection law).[^01chapter1_18] With that said, we do see some potentially
promising provisions such as Article 25 of the EU's General Data
Protection Regulation on 'data protection by design and default.' But,
we have questions about how this translates (if indeed if it is possible
to do so) into the design or hardcoding of systems.[^01chapter1_19] We also
recognise this also needs to be about more than privacy,[^01chapter1_20] and it may
be more fruitful if we shift the focus away from privacy, and towards
data ethics, human rights more generally and social justice as we have
attempted to do here in this Good Data book.

There is also a critical question about how do we engage and empower
technologists, designers and end-users in building Good Data initiatives
and communities of change? How do we educate and encourage them to be
more ethical in their work, and indeed protest Bad Data practices, as we
have recently witnessed.[^01chapter1_21] How can we work better with technologists,
designers and end-users to co-design and co-educate each other about
Good Data ethics, ideas and practices?

It is here we see our future work heading. With *Good Data* we have
moved our work from critique to imagining and articulating a more
optimistic vision of the datafied future, with our enormous gratitude to
this book's contributors for assisting us in doing so. The next steps
for us all are to build the Good Data future we want to see rather than
letting governments and companies build a Bad Data future for us.

## References

Arora, Payal. 'The Bottom of the Data Pyramid: Big Data and the Global
South', *International Journal of Communication* 10 (2016): 1681-1699.

*BFU presents: "Don't be Evil" -- Data Activism and Digital Rights.*
Public Panel Discussion by Brisbane Free University, West End, Brisbane,
8 November 2017,
https://brisbanefreeuniversity.org/2017/11/06/bfu-presents-dont-be-evil-data-activism-and-digital-rights/.

Brisbane Free University. About,
https://brisbanefreeuniversity.org/about/.

Browne, Simone. *Dark Matters: On the Surveillance of Blackness*,
Durham: Duke University Press, 2015.

Brownsword, Roger, Eloise Scotford, and Karen Yeung (eds). *The Oxford
Handbook of Law Regulation and Technology*, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2017.

Carlson, Anna. 'Imagining 'Good' Data: Northern Utopias, Southern
Lessons', *Big Data from the South blog*, 25 May 2018
https://data-activism.net/2018/05/bigdatasur-blog-13-imagining-good-data-northern-utopias-southern-lessons/.

Carrington, Kerry, Russell Hogg, John Scott and Maximo Sozzo. *The
Palgrave Handbook of Criminology and the Global South*, Cham,
Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.

Connell, Raewyn. *Southern Theory: The Global Dynamics of Knowledge in
Social Science*, New South Wales: Allen & Unwin, 2007.

Data Justice Lab. https://datajusticelab.org/.

Dencik, Lina, Arne Hintz and Jonathan Cable. 'Towards data justice? The
ambiguity of anti- surveillance resistance in political activism', *Big
Data & Society* 3.2 (2016): 1-12.

Ferguson, Andrew. *The Rise of Big Data Policing: Surveillance, Race,
and the Future of Law Enforcement*, New York: NYU Press, 2017.

Funding Matters, https://fundingmatters.tech/.

Goldsmith, Jack and Tim Wu, *Who Controls the Internet: Illusions of a
Borderless World,* New York: Oxford University Press, 2006.

Hilderbrandt, Mireille. 'Extraterritorial jurisdiction to enforce in
cyberspace: Bodin, Schmitt, Grotius in cyberspace', *University of
Toronto Law Journal* 63 (2013), 196--224.

Koops, Bert-Jaap. 'The trouble with European data protection law',
*International Data Privacy Law*, 4.4 (2014): 250-261.

Koops, Bert-Jaap and Ronald Leenes. 'Privacy regulation cannot be
hardcoded. A critical comment on the 'privacy by design' provisions in
data-protection law', *International Review of Law, Computers and
Technology*, 28.2 (2014): 159-171.

Kukutai, Tahu and John Taylor (eds). *Indigenous Data Sovereignty:
Towards an Agenda*. Canberra: ANU Press, 2016.

Lee, Murray. 'Crime and the Cyber Periphery: Criminological Theory
Beyond Time and Space.' in Kerry Carrington, Russell Hogg, John Scott
and Maximo Sozzo (eds), *The Palgrave Handbook of Criminology and the
Global South*, Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018, pp. 223-244.

Mann, Monique and Angela Daly. '(Big) Data and the North-*in*-South:
Australia's Informational Imperialism and Digital Colonialism',
*Television and New Media* (in press, 2019).

Mann, Monique and Ian Warren. 'The digital and legal divide: Silk Road,
transnational online policing and Southern criminology', in Kerry
Carrington, Russell Hogg, John Scott and Maximo Sozzo (eds.), *The
Palgrave Handbook of Criminology and the Global South*, Cham: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2018, pp. 245-260.

Mann, Monique, Ian Warren and Sally Kennedy. 'The legal geographies of
transnational cyber-prosecutions: Extradition, human rights and forum
shifting', *Global Crime* 9.2 (2018): 107-124.

Matzner, Tobias. 'Why privacy is not enough privacy in the context of
"ubiquitous computing" and "big data"', *Journal of Information,
Communication and Ethics in Society*, 12.2 (2014): 93--106.

Milan, Stefania and Emiliano Treré. 'Big Data from the South: The
beginning of a conversation we must have', *DATACTVE Blog*, 16 October
2017, https://data-activism.net/2017/10/bigdatasur/.

Montiero, Mike. 'Ethics can't be a Side Hustle', *Dear Design Student,*
19 March 2017,
https://deardesignstudent.com/ethics-cant-be-a-side-hustle-b9e78c090aee.

Noble, Safiya Umoja. *Algorithms of oppression: How search engines
reinforce racism*, New York: NYU Press, 2018.

Powell, Anastasia, Gregory Stratton & Robin Cameron. *Digital
Criminology: Crime Justice in Digital Society*, New York: Routledge,
2018.

Salinas, Sara and Jillian D'Onfro, 'Google Employees: We no Longer
believe the company places values over profit', *CNBC,* 27 November
2018,
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/11/27/read-google-employees-open-letter-protesting-project-dragonfly.html.

Sandvig, Christian, Kevin Hamilton, Karrie Karahalios and Cedric
Langbort. 'When the algorithm itself is a racist: Diagnosing ethical
harm in the basic components of software', *International Journal of
Communication* 10 (2016): 4972-4990.

Shaban, Hamza. 'Amazon Employees Demand Company Cut Ties with ICE',
*Washington Post*, 22 June 2018,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2018/06/22/amazon-employees-demand-company-cut-ties-with-ice/?utm\_term=.713db9c3092a.

Taylor, Linnet. 'What is data justice? The case for connecting digital
rights and freedoms globally', *Big Data & Society* 4.2 (2017): 1-14.

[^01chapter1_1]: See Data Justice Lab, https://datajusticelab.org/

[^01chapter1_2]: See: Stefania Milan and Emiliano Treré, 'Big Data from the South:
    The beginning of a conversation we must have', *DATACTIVE Blog*, 16
    October 2017, https://data-activism.net/2017/10/bigdatasur/; Kerry
    Carrington, Russell Hogg, John Scott and Maximo Sozzo, *The Palgrave
    Handbook of Criminology and the Global South*, Cham: Palgrave
    Macmillan, 2018; Raewyn Connell, *Southern Theory: The Global
    Dynamics of Knowledge in Social Science*, New South Wales: Allen &
    Unwin, 2007.

[^01chapter1_3]: Monique Mann and Angela Daly, '(Big) Data and the
    North-*in*-South: Australia's Informational Imperialism and Digital
    Colonialism', *Television and New Media*, (in press, 2019).

[^01chapter1_4]: Ibid.

[^01chapter1_5]: *BFU presents: "Don't be Evil" -- Data Activism and Digital
    Rights.* Public Panel Discussion by Brisbane Free University, West
    End, Brisbane, 8 November 2017,

    https://brisbanefreeuniversity.org/2017/11/06/bfu-presents-dont-be-evil-data-activism-and-digital-rights/

[^01chapter1_6]: Brisbane Free University, About,
    https://brisbanefreeuniversity.org/about/

[^01chapter1_7]: Starting with: Anna Carlson, 'Imagining 'Good' Data: Northern
    Utopias, Southern Lessons', *Big Data from the South blog*, 25 May
    2018,
    https://data-activism.net/2018/05/bigdatasur-blog-13-imagining-good-data-northern-utopias-southern-lessons/

[^01chapter1_8]: See also: Tahu Kukutai and John Taylor (eds), *Indigenous Data
    Sovereignty: Towards an Agenda*, Canberra: ANU Press, 2016.

[^01chapter1_9]: Data Justice Lab, https://datajusticelab.org/

[^01chapter1_10]: Lina Dencik, Arne Hintz and Jonathan Cable, 'Towards data
    justice? The ambiguity of anti-surveillance resistance in political
    activism', *Big Data & Society* 3.2 (2016): 9.

[^01chapter1_11]: Linnet Taylor, 'What is data justice? The case for connecting
    digital rights and freedoms globally', *Big Data & Society* 4.2
    (2017): 8.

[^01chapter1_12]: Anastasia Powell, Gregory Stratton and Robin Cameron, *Digital
    Criminology: Crime Justice in Digital Society*, New York: Routledge,
    2018.

[^01chapter1_13]: See also: Simone Browne, *Dark Matters: On the Surveillance of
    Blackness*, Durham: Duke University Press, 2015; Andrew Ferguson,
    *The Rise of Big Data Policing: Surveillance, Race, and the Future
    of Law Enforcement*, New York: NYU Press, 2017; Safiya Umoja Noble,
    *Algorithms of oppression: How search engines reinforce racism*, New
    York: NYU Press, 2018; Christian Sandvig, Kevin Hamilton, Karrie
    Karahalios and Cedric Langbort, 'When the algorithm itself is a
    racist: Diagnosing ethical harm in the basic components of software'
    *International Journal of Communication*, 10 (2016): 4972-4990.

[^01chapter1_14]: See also: Jack Goldsmith and Tim Wu, *Who Controls the Internet:
    Illusions of a Borderless World,* New York: Oxford University Press,
    2006; Mireille Hilderbrandt, 'Extraterritorial jurisdiction to
    enforce in cyberspace: Bodin, Schmitt, Grotius in cyberspace',
    *University of Toronto Law Journal* 63 (2013), 196--224; Murray Lee,
    'Crime and the Cyber Periphery: Criminological Theory Beyond Time
    and Space', in Kerry Carrington, Russell Hogg, John Scott and Maximo
    Sozzo (eds), *The Palgrave Handbook of Criminology and the Global
    South*, Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018, pp. 223-244; Monique Mann,
    and Ian Warren, 'The digital and legal divide: Silk Road,
    transnational online policing and Southern criminology', in Kerry
    Carrington, Russell Hogg, John Scott and Maximo Sozzo (eds), *The
    Palgrave Handbook of Criminology and the Global South*, Cham,
    Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018, pp. 245-260; Monique Mann,
    Ian Warren and Sally Kennedy, 'The legal geographies of
    transnational cyber-prosecutions: Extradition, human rights and
    forum shifting', *Global Crime* 9.2 (2018): 107-124.

[^01chapter1_15]: Funding Matters, https://fundingmatters.tech/

[^01chapter1_16]: Payal Arora, 'The Bottom of the Data Pyramid: Big Data and the
    Global South', *International Journal of Communication*, 10 (2016):
    1681--1699.

[^01chapter1_17]: See: Roger Brownsword, Eloise Scotford, and Karen Yeung (eds),
    *The Oxford Handbook of Law Regulation and Technology*, Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, 2017.

[^01chapter1_18]: See: Bert-Jaap Koops, 'The trouble with European data protection
    law', *International Data Privacy Law*, 4.4 (2014): 250-261.

[^01chapter1_19]: See: Bert-Jaap Koops and Ronald Leenes, 'Privacy regulation
    cannot be hardcoded. A critical comment on the 'privacy by design'
    provisions in data-protection law', *International Review of Law,
    Computers and Technology*, 28.2 (2014): 159-171.

[^01chapter1_20]: See: Tobias Matzner, 'Why privacy is not enough privacy in the
    context of "ubiquitous computing" and "big data"', *Journal of
    Information, Communication and Ethics in Society* 12.2 (2014):
    93--106.

[^01chapter1_21]: See: Mike Montiero, 'Ethics can't be a Side Hustle', *Dear Design
    Student*, 19 March 2017,
    https://deardesignstudent.com/ethics-cant-be-a-side-hustle-b9e78c090aee
    ; Hamza Shaban, 'Amazon Employees Demand Company Cut Ties with ICE',
    *Washington Post*, 22 June 2018,
    https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2018/06/22/amazon-employees-demand-company-cut-ties-with-ice/?utm\_term=.713db9c3092a;
    Sara Salinas and Jillian D'Onfro, 'Google Employees: We no Longer
    believe the company places values over profit', *CNBC,* 27 November
    2018,
    https://www.cnbc.com/2018/11/27/read-google-employees-open-letter-protesting-project-dragonfly.html
